This is the second installment of our story of Seth, a physical therapist in Sisters, OR who uses software to keep his patients safe from the ravages of COVID-19.

Previously... we saw Seth show Katy how to share a tool Seth believes can help the residents of Sisters minimize the impact of the virus on their health and their city's economy.

In this episode, Seth shows Katy what happens when the rubber meets the road...


EPISODE 3: IT COULD BE WORSE

By now, Katy knows the drill. First, PT. Then another lesson in armchair epidemiology.

WHERE IN THE WORLD
"Ok, Katy, today I'll show you how the app not only keeps us safe.
"But first we need to take a little detour because Google doesn't know which building we are in.
"I'm using that old Galaxy again here.
"I don't see Step and Spine listed on the map, so I will search for it's location."

Seth types in the search box.

"Good, there we are at the top of the list...oops, wrong building. 
"That's OK. the app can handle this:
"I select the marker where it is (in the middle of the grocery store)...
"...Then I drag it over here where we are.
"Now the next time I open the app, our map marker will be in the correct location.
"So, let's get to the good stuff."



BRB
"Today, Katy, we are going to talk about the crux of the app. We are going to talk about the Big Red Button.
Since my calendar has no events, when I click the BRB I see a message that tells me I haven't use the app yet, so there's nothing the app can do to crush the virus."

To illustrate how exposure alerts work, Seth says,
"OK, you already scanned in today. 
"Since we both share the same space right now, I will add an event to my calendar that is fairly close in time to your event on your calendar."

Seth clicks the MARK CALENDAR button then adds,
"Now, to show you what an exposure alert looks like, I will warn the app that I have test positive for COVID..."

A new banner appears on Katy's phone.
"Woah, what's this?" Katy asks.

"That is the alert you need to justify getting the time and expense of getting tested yourself.
"And I used that term 'justify' deliberately. 
"The alert's job is to provide you actionable intelligence about Sisters.
"You will use this intel to decide if your risk of exposure is sufficient to intervene on community spread.
"

"Ready? OK, go to the Big Red Button and click it."



"There are two ways to look at this screen. Carefully and in a panic. 
"This is why it's a good idea to come to terms with this page BEFORE you come down with the virus."

"OK," replies Katy.

"This page has several default values, so even if you are in emotional distress because you just tested positive, if you immediately hit the YES button, other people will be able to respond to the alert and get tested. OK?"

Katy nods tentatively.

Seth continues, "Right, so before we go into the details on this page, let's just do to things: First, select the last item on the list: LCT DRILL. then click the top item selected by default."

She does, and the progress bar changes color and a succinct message appears.

"Use this DRILL option to safely experiment with the app. Let's see what happens on my phone when you click YES."



When a test or physician diagnoses you with COVID, you are having a bad day. But it could be much worse. 
There could be dozens of people infected the same way you were, but they don't know it yet.
Today, for example, in our little zip code of 7,000 residents, COVID infection when up by 19 cases. That's an increase from 825/10,000 to 850/10,000.

Armed with the app, as soon as you know, everybody you shared space and time with knows there's a good chance they are carrying the virus too.

So if as a group we all get tested on the same day, we have deprived the virus of up to two weeks to replicate and mutate. 

Without the app, time is now our ally.

With it, time is not the viruses ally, and it hasn't got a chance.


Seth's closing remarks to Katy are, "Next time I'll show you how you can invite me to your Thursday card games..."


As Katy leaves, Seth says,"Until then, Katy, stay safe out there..."